[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: criminals actually have a better statistical chance than non-criminals of getting elected.
[Amit Varma]: I found this out from a fascinating book called When Crime Pays by the brilliant political
[Amit Varma]: scientist Milan Vaishnav. Milan is a director of and senior fellow at the South Asia Program
[Amit Varma]: of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He is also the host of a superb podcast,
[Amit Varma]: The Grand Tamasha, which is co-produced by the Carnegie Endowment and the Hindustan Times
[Amit Varma]: and focuses, as the name indicates, on these general elections. It will be linked from
[Amit Varma]: the episode page for this episode. Before I begin my conversation with Milan though,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel is an
[Amit Varma]: audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app. They have thousands
[Amit Varma]: of audio books you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages like
[Amit Varma]: Hindi and Marathi and unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 2.99 per month, but you
[Amit Varma]: can get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to storytel.com slash IVM, that's Storytel
[Amit Varma]: with a single L, mind you. I actually use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they
[Amit Varma]: sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love, since my guest today
[Amit Varma]: is named Milan. My recommendation today is by an author named Milan. Milan Kundera is
[Amit Varma]: one of my favorite 20th century novelists, and one of his best books is available on
[Amit Varma]: Storytel, The Unbearable Lightness of Being. Kundera's books stay with you long after you
[Amit Varma]: finish reading them, and in this case, the movie based on the book is one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: film adaptations. The Unbearable Lightness of Being, the movie, was made in the 1980s,
[Amit Varma]: directed by Philip Kaufman and starred Daniel Day-Lewis, Lena Olin, and the gorgeous Juliet
[Amit Varma]: Binoche, my childhood crush. But read the book first, only on Storytel, and remember
[Amit Varma]: you get a 30-day free trial if you go to Storytel.com slash IVM, remember, that's Storytel with
[Amit Varma]: a single L. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Milan, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thanks for having me. Before we get to the
[Amit Varma]: subject of this episode, you're doing this awesome political podcast with the Hindustan
[Amit Varma]: Times. So why don't you tell us a little bit about these elections? What's what's happening?
[Guest]: Who's gonna win? Small question. So I think things look very different today than they
[Amit Varma]: did even at the start of 2019. And we are recording this, by the way, on March 18. This
[Amit Varma]: episode is going to be released on April 1. So a lot could have changed. Kindly don't
[Guest]: hold Milan responsible for anything.
[Guest]: That's right. Hopefully everyone will forget by the time May 23 comes around and we've
[Guest]: counted votes. I think that the momentum is shifted quite significantly towards Modi and
[Guest]: the BJP. And it's not only because of the events at Pulwama and the aftermath, although
[Guest]: I do think that that was a net positive for him. But I think as we've moved towards the
[Guest]: main campaign, Modi's attributes, his claim to fame, decisiveness, leadership, nationalism
[Guest]: have come to the fore. And here I think we see the opposition's weaknesses in terms of
[Guest]: both coming up and answering the leadership question, but also, you know, trying to articulate
[Guest]: a cogent counter narrative to what Modi and the BJP have to offer. And I think for many
[Guest]: Indians when they look at the opposition, a lot of their charges seem rather petty.
[Guest]: Because I think in the most parts of this country, certainly in North India, maybe less
[Guest]: so in South India, Modi is popular. You know, people like him. People would like to believe
[Guest]: that he has their best interests at heart, that he has clean intent. So they're willing
[Guest]: to forgive quite a lot of policy missteps, whether it's, you know, GST, demonetization,
[Guest]: you know, various other grievances with respect to the economy, and instead focus on the positive.
[Guest]: So I think what the recent Balakot strike does is to give people who are hunting for
[Guest]: an excuse to support Modi, give them a reason to vote for him on election day.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, I am a Namche commentator based in a city. So whenever someone asks me, what
[Amit Varma]: do you think is going to happen in the election, my honest answer has to be listen, I don't
[Amit Varma]: have a clue, because it's just so many, it's a conglomeration of local elections, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are so many factors in play. And it's incredibly hard for someone like me to have
[Amit Varma]: a sense and to leave my biases aside. But as a political scientist, you're obviously
[Amit Varma]: looking beyond all of that. And you're trying, you know, you have, what's the kind of data
[Amit Varma]: you look at? What are the kind of trends that you look at to try to get a sense of what
[Guest]: is really happening in the country?
[Guest]: So, you know, obviously, there are huge questions around the validity and accuracy of survey
[Guest]: data. Because we have too many instances in the past where surveys have sort of gotten
[Guest]: things wrong, both in terms of vote share and in terms of seat share. But I think the
[Guest]: way in which one can look at survey data is to sort of look at trends, because they do
[Guest]: tend to be kind of correlated with one another. So you could see very clearly, from, say,
[Guest]: the height of the BJP's power post-Luther British, to where we are today, definitely
[Guest]: a sort of narrowing of the race. And then more recently, again, a widening, and I think
[Guest]: I expect that widening will either grow or kind of stay the same, barring, you know,
[Guest]: major unforeseen events in the next couple of weeks. So I think that's one. I mean, I
[Guest]: think the second is trying to go beyond the sort of horse race of, you know, this leader
[Guest]: said X and the other leader said Y. But look at some of the underlying trends, whether
[Guest]: it's with young voters or female voters, their participation, what they're saying matters
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: You know, for instance, one of the striking things about 2014 that we were able to detect
[Guest]: pre-election, not that we had foreseen a single party majority of the size, I don't want to
[Guest]: claim credit for that because I didn't, but that there was a surprising convergence in
[Guest]: priorities among rural and urban dwellers. They both were saying the exact same things
[Guest]: mattered to them. The top three issues in both types of places were price rise, lack
[Guest]: of sort of development jobs, and corruption. Now, the precise ordering of those three questions
[Guest]: might vary from Telenado to, you know, Bihar, but they were always the top three issues,
[Amit Varma]: both in urban and in rural.
[Amit Varma]: And there are people who sort of say that, you know, for example, just to pick one of
[Amit Varma]: those issues, which is development, that people who cited development to vote for the BJP
[Amit Varma]: were actually rationalizing or putting a respectable face to their innate bigotry or whatever the
[Amit Varma]: case might be. And they were really voting for other reasons. I mean, so how does one
[Amit Varma]: really know why are people really voting? What are the forces at play here? Because
[Amit Varma]: there are a lot of complex forces at play here, which will not show up on this kind
[Amit Varma]: of survey data, right? Because you will never see these sort of trends.
[Guest]: Right. No, I mean, I think, you know, one of the major problems in survey research is
[Guest]: what social scientists call social desirability bias, right? Basically, a numerator knocks
[Guest]: on my door and asks me a bunch of questions, and I don't want him or her to judge me in
[Guest]: the wrong way. And so therefore, I sort of tell them, you know, what I think they want
[Guest]: to hear. So I think that obviously is an issue. There's ways of getting around that through
[Guest]: experimentation. You know, there's survey experiments where you sort of give people
[Guest]: vignettes or different kinds of prompts and see kind of what changes their thing. So some
[Guest]: people have tried that. I think the other thing, though, just on the economy, you know,
[Guest]: I'm one of these people who believes that there has been a shift in the Indian electorate
[Guest]: that traditionally there's been this truism that good economics doesn't make for good
[Guest]: politics. That if you look over the vast stretch of post-independence history, particularly
[Guest]: when we have data, say, the last three, four decades, that there's no apparent correlation
[Guest]: between a government's economic performance and how that incumbent does at the time of
[Guest]: election. But what's interesting is if you start disaggregating that relationship by
[Guest]: decade, you see actually starting around the year 2000, there is much more of a close correlation.
[Guest]: In other words, there are positive electoral rewards to better growth. Now, is this of
[Guest]: extremely robust and strong relationship? No. Can it explain all the variation? Not
[Guest]: at all. But I do think that there has been a subtle shift. You know, part of that is
[Guest]: once people taste the fruits of rapid growth or high growth, they start to demand more.
[Guest]: So you know, one of the puzzling things about this election, if Modi and the BJP come back
[Guest]: to power, is clearly growth has been very uneven. And so what were the other factors
[Guest]: that were shaping the electorate in this race beyond just sort of bread and butter issues
[Guest]: like growth, jobs, inflation, and so on?
[Amit Varma]: Siddharth Tavakoli And I think the other, just to sort of add
[Amit Varma]: to that, even if there are more people in the electorate who are claiming a concern
[Amit Varma]: for economic issues, that doesn't necessarily mean that they'll promote the right kind of
[Amit Varma]: policies. For example, if you ask a farmer today, what do you want most? Do you want
[Amit Varma]: a Hindu Rashtra? He'll probably say, no, no, man, I just, you know, do something about
[Amit Varma]: the economics. I want development. But what he has in mind is farm loan waivers, which
[Amit Varma]: are just a short term fix, and not any of the structural reforms that we actually need.
[Guest]: So you know, I think, I mean, this is very relevant to the current Prime Minister, because
[Guest]: in 2014, you know, Modi became something of a Rorschach test. We all sort of projected
[Guest]: onto him what we wanted to see, right? So some people saw the Hindu strongman of 2002.
[Guest]: Other people saw kind of a more market friendly, libertarian minded, you know, kind of modernizer.
[Guest]: And in reality, we've sort of got, I think, something that's closer to the middle. But
[Guest]: you know, he was very careful in the run up to the 2014 polls, of not really saying all
[Guest]: that much, in terms of specific policy, right? It was subcassades, because it was good governance,
[Guest]: it was rejuvenating the Indian economy, right, making India kind of a world leader on the
[Guest]: global stage, once again, I mean, these were sort of platitudes. And then I think we all
[Guest]: filled in the blanks with the kind of policy menus that we hoped he would sort of pick
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: And now that we know that, and would you therefore say that if your contention is that people
[Amit Varma]: do care about economics, would you then say that maybe the Congress missed the trick a
[Amit Varma]: little bit here by focusing on Rafale, by focusing on Pulwama, and so on, when they
[Amit Varma]: should perhaps just have been talking jobs, jobs, jobs, where are the jobs?
[Guest]: One of the most enduring mysteries about this campaign cycle is why the Congress has not
[Guest]: just done that. In my personal view, I think they've wasted a lot of time with the Rafale
[Guest]: scandal, because I think frankly, outside of a small coterie of people in urban metros,
[Guest]: not that many people are either going to care, or are going to be able to understand what
[Guest]: the deal is about. You know, we were talking about this before, if you asked a veteran
[Guest]: defense expert to give you a 15 second soundbite on Rafale, I think he or she would really
[Guest]: struggle. And so I fear that for the Congress, they're also falling into the same trap now
[Guest]: with this Pulwama thing, talking about China, how is this government not able to get China
[Guest]: to vote in the UN Security Council to sanction Masoud Azhar, the head of Jaish-e-Mohammed,
[Guest]: criticizing Ajit Doval for his hand in getting Masoud Azhar back as part of the hostage exchange.
[Guest]: These are losers in terms of issues for the Congress, I think that they should instead
[Guest]: focus and Priyanka Gandhi did this in Ahmedabad the other day, talking about jobs, agrarian
[Guest]: distress and so on and so forth. But it may be too little too late. And I think the other
[Guest]: thing that is hurting the Congress is, they don't seem to be able to articulate a kind
[Guest]: of alternative future. So what is it that they would do if they came to power? So we
[Guest]: see some strands of ideas, you know, more loan waivers, a better income support scheme.
[Guest]: But I think a lot of folks have sort of lost confidence that on the ideas front anyway,
[Guest]: they have a clear sense of, you know, what they would do if they came to power.
[Amit Varma]: Dr. Ahmed Sabir Let's kind of move on from talking about
[Amit Varma]: these elections to a subject that actually, you know, affects all the parties where all
[Amit Varma]: the parties are really equally guilty, which is crime and politics, you know, as your book
[Amit Varma]: describes in such detail, you know, criminality in politics is not restricted to this party
[Amit Varma]: or that party, despite all the noises that Modi made in 2014. The BJP is as guilty of
[Amit Varma]: it as anyone. And interestingly, people seem to think it's a problem in the Hindi heartland.
[Amit Varma]: But as your book shows, it's spread out all across the country. And it's got deep structural
[Amit Varma]: reasons. And I found all of that very fascinating. And I was quite taken with your approach to
[Amit Varma]: handling this issue, which was to think of Indian politics in terms of markets to talk
[Amit Varma]: about the political marketplace and examine the incentives within that marketplace. And
[Amit Varma]: then from there, figure out why we are where we are. So how did you sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: arrive at that approach, that way of looking at this problem?
[Guest]: Dr. Ahmed Sabir So, you know, I went in, very influenced by
[Guest]: what the global literature says. And if I had to summarize the prevailing wisdom in
[Guest]: the political economy literature, it's basically about information, that where voters lack
[Guest]: adequate information about the candidates they're voting for, they are liable to choose
[Guest]: quote unquote, bad candidates, bad meaning corrupt, dishonest, tainted, criminal in some
[Guest]: way. And so if you just give them that information, they're able to update their calculation and
[Guest]: choose quote unquote, good politicians who are the kind of honest or non criminals. And
[Guest]: so I had begun to spend some time with voters and political campaigns in India. And what
[Guest]: I quickly realized is that wasn't the story. Many people were voting for these criminals,
[Guest]: and they had this information. But there was another reason they were doing so. And so
[Guest]: then I started to think about this question of the demand, where does the demand for this
[Guest]: kind of a figure, whether it's a Papu Yadav or an Anand Singh or some of the people I
[Guest]: talk about in my book? And where do these people come from? Right? I mean, at the end
[Guest]: of the day, it's parties who are giving them tickets. It's not you know, if you're an independent
[Guest]: in this country, it's very, very hard to win elections. I mean, the independents historically
[Guest]: have performed very, very poorly. And so that's really how I backed into this demand supply
[Guest]: framework. And then I sort of thought, you know, let's try to it's almost like an onion
[Guest]: that you're peeling the layers successively, you know, to try to get at the core of the
[Guest]: story. But you know, I came in at thinking I knew what the answer was only to be very
[Guest]: quickly proven wrong. And that put me at odds with what other people, you know, in the academy
[Guest]: were sort of saying, but I thought it was rather unfair to transpose, you know, all
[Guest]: the work that had been done in other countries and just say, well, you know, India probably
[Guest]: is the same.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's it's struck me while reading it that it's a very fine work of public choice
[Amit Varma]: economics and you're a trained political scientist. So let's take a detour for a moment because
[Amit Varma]: I meant to ask you about this. Tell me a little bit about, you know, how you became a political
[Amit Varma]: scientist and what are the kind of things you studied for this?
[Guest]: Sure. So I studied politics and economics as an undergraduate in the US. And I didn't
[Guest]: really know that you could make a career out of that. I just thought, you know, I'm interested,
[Guest]: this is sort of a hobby. And I ended up spending a summer interning at the Pentagon. And so
[Guest]: my eyes were open to the different kinds of careers one could have. And then I stayed
[Guest]: on for an additional semester and worked at a think tank. And so when I graduated, I was
[Guest]: sort of bitten by the bug. I knew I wanted to come back. So I sort of, you know, worked
[Guest]: the trenches as very lowly research assistant at a series of think tanks. But no think tanks
[Guest]: and research institutes are a funny place. So there's a real caste system. You know,
[Guest]: you're either the lowly researcher assistant, or you're a fellow or a senior fellow carrying
[Guest]: out your research.
[Amit Varma]: There's no middle class.
[Guest]: There's no middle class and there's no social mobility. So I decided, you know, by default,
[Guest]: I basically if I wanted to kind of jump ranks, I was going to have to go do a PhD. And so
[Guest]: I decided to do a PhD in political science. But funnily enough, up until this point in
[Guest]: time, I had never worked on India. As an Indian American, as the son of Indian immigrants,
[Guest]: my natural reaction was to do the exact opposite of whatever my culture or family was. And
[Guest]: so for years and years and years, I thought who would want to do India? It's not exotic
[Guest]: enough. You know, I know it already. Of course, none of those things were true. And I think
[Guest]: it wasn't until I got to graduate school, when I started to realize that, A, there's
[Guest]: so much we don't know about India. B, that's a place where you can really make a contribution.
[Guest]: And C, you know, PhDs are six or seven years long in the States if you're doing political
[Guest]: science. So this has to be something that is going to be both personally and professionally
[Guest]: rewarding to you. And the light bulb just sort of went off and India kind of floated
[Guest]: to the top. And so I spent a summer here in New Delhi working at CSDS, you know, who are
[Guest]: the ones who do regular polling. And I'd never look back.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And getting back to the book, When Crime Pays, so you essentially ask five questions
[Amit Varma]: in the book to try and figure out why our politics is so infested with crime. And, and
[Amit Varma]: of course, the first three have to deal with incentives, which is, you know, the first
[Amit Varma]: one is, why do criminals gravitate towards politics in the first place? The second is,
[Amit Varma]: why do parties choose to have criminal candidates? And the third is, why do voters vote for criminal
[Amit Varma]: candidates, even when they know that they're criminals? In fact, like you point out that
[Amit Varma]: it's often a feature, not a bug, that they're voting for these guys because of their criminal
[Amit Varma]: backgrounds and not in spite of it. So let's kind of get to the first of those questions,
[Amit Varma]: which is, what are the incentives for criminals to get into politics? And you know, as you
[Amit Varma]: kind of pointed out in your book that it wasn't always like this, that perhaps up to the 70s,
[Amit Varma]: criminals played a kind of a side role where they would help politicians, they would do
[Amit Varma]: booth capturing or mobilize voters and stuff like that. But at some point, something fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: shifts in the political landscape that prompts them to make the move themselves. Tell me
[Guest]: about this.
[Guest]: That's right. So if you go back and read the earliest reports of elections in 1952, in
[Guest]: the early 50s, you see in the Election Commission's official reports, you know, scattered mentions
[Guest]: of the use of kind of gundas on the part of politicians and political parties to suppress
[Guest]: voters, if you think they're going to vote against you to mobilize voters to capture
[Guest]: boots to kind of do the dirty work of politicians. And that starts to increase, it's pioneered
[Guest]: by the Congress, and then people start to sort of copycat what the Congress is doing.
[Guest]: But they're very much at the periphery of politics. They are not the candidates, they
[Guest]: are sort of the hired guns. And the quid pro quo there is, look, if we come to power, we'll
[Guest]: protect you. But you've got to do this, you know, for us. So the incentives were totally
[Guest]: compatible. Several things started to change slowly over time at first. One is that you
[Guest]: start to see the rise of identity politics. And so some of these cast expressions get
[Guest]: mobilized and activated. And these gundas are forms of that expression. By and large,
[Guest]: a lot of the politicians were still from the Hindu upper castes. Number two is you start
[Guest]: to see a hollowing out of the state apparatus, particularly the law and order institutions.
[Guest]: And money becomes more important as the population is growing and candidates are trying to sort
[Guest]: of woo voters. But where you really see this kind of critical break is around the Indira's
[Guest]: time in the 1970s, where at that point, two things happen. One is that the Congress system
[Guest]: starts to collapse under the weight of its own contradictions, which then opens up political
[Guest]: space for these political entrepreneurs to rush in and grab a piece of that.
[Guest]: Sadanand Rajan What's the Congress system?
[Guest]: Matthew 15 So the Congress system essentially was, you
[Guest]: know, this very cultivated sense of a system of sort of patronage and clientelism overseen
[Guest]: by the Congress, which, you know, meant that the Congress had reasonably good local party
[Guest]: organizations and political networks. Over time, as Indira begins to centralize more
[Guest]: power in her own hands, some of these networks start to atrophy. Now, there's an underlying
[Guest]: weakness already generating because again, as I said, the Congress claimed to represent
[Guest]: everybody. But in fact, if you look at who the politicians were, who actually were on
[Guest]: the ballots got elected, it tended to be from a relatively thin band of society. So there's
[Guest]: already some sort of disenchantment. And a lot of these criminal entrepreneurs realized
[Guest]: that over the years, they had accumulated resources, they could accumulate black money,
[Guest]: and they knew how to move it around, that they became the mediators between the state
[Guest]: and society. But yet they weren't getting any of the credit, they weren't getting the
[Guest]: financial rents necessarily, because the politicians were taking their cut. They weren't getting
[Guest]: the ego rents or the psychological rents, because at the end of the day, they were just,
[Guest]: you know, the kind of hired gun. And so they decided in the book, I use the kind of analogy
[Guest]: of, you know, vertical integration, right? So when a manufacturer decides that, you know,
[Guest]: I'm building cars, I should take advantage of economies of scale and start to manufacture
[Guest]: my own tires, criminals essentially started to do that. So you start to see particularly
[Guest]: in the 1970s, in the post emergency time, criminals themselves directly standing for
[Guest]: election, you know, and they say things like, look, everyone was coming, paying their respects
[Guest]: to the politician, and we were getting nothing, but they rely on us. So why don't we just
[Guest]: cut out the middleman and just and just sort of do it ourselves. And so that system starts
[Guest]: to rapidly escalate. And one of the things that Indira Gandhi did, which now when we
[Guest]: look back, was extremely harmful to India's political economy, is she she banned corporate
[Guest]: donations to political parties. Now, that sounds to some people may be like a good thing.
[Guest]: But essentially, what it did is then shifted all political funding underground, and she
[Guest]: never replaced it with something else. In Europe, they've replaced it with the public
[Guest]: financing system. And so then there really was a premium on how do you aggregate and
[Guest]: move this black money and criminals had an advantage there. And so we're still living
[Guest]: with the legacy of that policy decision. As you know, you know, most money which gets
[Guest]: spent in election time is unaccounted for, right? So we have official estimates. But
[Guest]: we know that the actual numbers are probably 10x, you know, what politicians themselves
[Guest]: report if not more.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, another factor you mentioned while analyzing the incentives of the criminals
[Amit Varma]: themselves is the rise of anti incumbency, that it was far more common in the 50s or
[Amit Varma]: 60s to retain your seat. But as anti incumbency went up through the late 60s, 70s, 80s, what
[Amit Varma]: inevitably happened was that if you were a criminal don, like you talk about how the
[Amit Varma]: goondas became dada, so let's say you're a dada of your neighborhood, rather than help
[Amit Varma]: one politician and then in the next election, he goes out of power and you're on the outside
[Amit Varma]: again, why not just make sure you are part of the system and you stand instead and you
[Amit Varma]: make as much money as you can and all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's really a central characteristic. You know, when the Congress was so dominant,
[Guest]: if you were the goonda, the night before the election day, you could sort of sleep easy,
[Guest]: you could rest easy, because odds are that your Congress politician you work with is
[Guest]: going to come back to power. Once that uncertainty increases, you're in a dangerous situation,
[Guest]: because if that patron of yours loses, then both the state and the opposition, which knows
[Guest]: about your dealings with the Congress could come after you. So they essentially decided,
[Guest]: why don't we just take our own fate, you know, into our own hands. And that's what they decided
[Guest]: to do. And of course, very soon, they realized that, you know, this wasn't just politically
[Guest]: profitable, it was also economically profitable.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got a great chapter which talks about how exactly how economically profitable
[Amit Varma]: it is, which is, you know, where you, you coined the term rents Raj, is that your term?
[Guest]: That's not my term. I think the rents Raj came first. Well, there was the resource Raj,
[Guest]: which is actually a term that Raghuram Rajan came up with. And the rents Raj was something
[Guest]: that the former chief economic advisor, Irvin Subramaniam, sort of adapted, you know, from
[Guest]: what Rajan said.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me sort of about the different kinds of rents. So can you can you first define
[Amit Varma]: rent seeking for me for those of my listeners?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think it's basically, you know, how do you make money without having
[Guest]: to do very much? And by the way, productive activity, right? I mean, so people who they
[Guest]: want a free lunch, I think that's one way of thinking about it. And so, you know, what
[Guest]: I talk about in the book is that, you know, you have these quite powerful changes in Indian
[Guest]: political economy. So you have the changing social makeup of our political class, the
[Guest]: enfranchised men of Dalits and backwards, and so on. You have economic changes from
[Guest]: a more command and control economy to a more market driven economy. Politically, of course,
[Guest]: you move from a one party dominant system to a more fragmented multi party system. But
[Guest]: the one thing which really is constant throughout, you know, post independence India is the strength
[Guest]: of institutions is always lagging behind those other changes that there really haven't been
[Guest]: too many governments who have prioritized administrative and governance reform. And so in that delta
[Guest]: between all of these pressures and aspirations comes in the opportunity to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: make rents, right. And so when you have market opening in 1991, a lot of the ability to make
[Guest]: money gets monopolized by people who are able to manipulate, you know, the leftovers of
[Guest]: the regulatory sort of regime. So in some cases, you have regulatory capture. In some
[Guest]: cases, you open up or you privatize, but you then don't re regulate, which is often something
[Guest]: that you have to do to make sure that there's not monopoly control. And so there's huge
[Guest]: rents from regulation. There's huge rents also from extraction, right? So the whole
[Guest]: topic of natural resources wasn't really something that was on the agenda in 1991. And we saw
[Guest]: the fallout from that in the UPA to government, right? I mean, all of the major scandals involved,
[Guest]: whether it was land, coal mining, telecommunication spectrum, which is a kind of natural resource.
[Guest]: So not only do politicians wield a lot of power to trade regulation for bribes or campaign
[Guest]: finance, but then they can also make a lot of money through these extractive routes.
[Guest]: So that was the story, you know, of a guy like Madhu Koda and Jharkhand, right? I mean,
[Guest]: that's essentially the game he played. But this happens at a much smaller scale as well.
[Guest]: So I mean, the thing in Mumbai, obviously, is, you know, why do you have this labyrinthine
[Guest]: structure of licenses and permits to do anything in real estate? Well, part of the reason is
[Guest]: because the politicians and the bureaucrats who control that need to fund themselves.
[Guest]: And so they're able to kind of say, look, let's do a deal, I'll give you something and
[Amit Varma]: you give me something in return.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand Anandamurthy And you kind of talk about the different,
[Amit Varma]: the three different kinds of rents. And obviously, the first of those is something that is pervasive
[Amit Varma]: all through our history is probably a little more before 91, but it still exists, which
[Amit Varma]: is essentially regulatory rent, which, you know, I've had a bunch of episodes on different
[Amit Varma]: aspects of this, like restaurant regulation, for example, and so on. And it basically means,
[Amit Varma]: every time you're paying a bribe to get something done, you're paying a sort of regulatory rent
[Amit Varma]: or every time a business is paying a bribe to get a license, that's regulatory rent.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, you know, you come to power, and you typically have a whole lot of these rents
[Amit Varma]: at your disposal. So you spend x amount getting to power and you can make 3x or 4x when you're
[Amit Varma]: in power and disperse patronage accordingly. But what's interesting is after 91, a new
[Amit Varma]: kind of rent explodes, which is extractive rents and where you quoted Rajan where he
[Amit Varma]: says that the license Raj has now become a resource Raj. And another interesting fact
[Amit Varma]: that I sort of found in your book was that while the number of billionaires expanded
[Amit Varma]: massively after 91, a significant percentage of them were in what you call rent thick sectors,
[Amit Varma]: which is they are in a sense benefiting from that kind of what you'd call crony socialism.
[Guest]: Is that correct? That's right. I mean, so this is work that Michael Walton, who's at
[Guest]: the Kennedy School and others have done to basically track billionaires over time. Now,
[Guest]: there has been a rise in billionaires in many countries. But one thing you notice about
[Guest]: India in the post 90s period is a the number of billionaires relative to India's sort of
[Guest]: per capita GDP. And the second is the sectoral breakdown of where they are. They are in these
[Guest]: rent thick sectors. So again, things like construction, real estate, you know, petroleum,
[Guest]: oil and gas. We think a lot about it billionaires, but in fact, that's not where the bulk of
[Guest]: the action has been over the past, you know, quarter century. And so that became a sort
[Guest]: of hallmark, I think, of India's political economy.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And there's a third kind of rent you mentioned political rents. Explain that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think here in political rents, I mean, obviously, there are two ways of looking
[Guest]: at it. So one is, when you're a politician, you are in a position to kind of extract resources
[Guest]: to, you know, further your own career. So the standard example is you're a politician
[Guest]: who has access to inside information about where a highway is going to go. And so therefore
[Guest]: you trade on that interest either directly because you've set up a firm or your family
[Guest]: member set up a firm. And you know, one remarkable fact about India is there's really no conflict
[Guest]: of interest statute at the federal level here. So, you know, even today, members of parliament
[Guest]: who have business interests, the only people that they have to declare those interests
[Guest]: to are the parliament secretariat and the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha. And those are private.
[Guest]: So the secretariat knows, but the people don't actually know. So it becomes very, very easy
[Guest]: to do that. And then the second, of course, aspect of political rents is this question
[Guest]: of sort of, you know, campaign finance, right? And being able to accumulate resources in
[Guest]: a way that gives you a leg up. And I think this is where the political parties, you know,
[Guest]: come in. You know, there is this question of, well, what is it that attracts political
[Guest]: parties to criminals, right? In many societies, if you knew someone was tainted or tarnished
[Guest]: because of some serious criminal case, you would sort of hightail it in the opposite
[Guest]: direction. But in India, they actually are falling over one another to try to recruit
[Guest]: these people to contest on their party labels.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand And that will bring us to the second question,
[Amit Varma]: which we'll come to after a short break. But before that, for those of my listeners who
[Amit Varma]: want an illustration of the first aspect of political rents that Milan just spoke about,
[Amit Varma]: consider the Bangalore airport. Why is it so incredibly far from the city? Just look
[Amit Varma]: into who bought all the land around it before the location was announced. We'll be back
[Amit Varma]: after a short break.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody. Welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network. If you're
[Unknown]: not following us on social media, please make sure that you do. We're IBM podcast on Facebook,
[Unknown]: Twitter and Instagram, please, please do. With the upcoming election season just around
[Unknown]: the corner, in case you really want to deep dive into some of the issues that matter,
[Unknown]: you should check out some of the shows on our network shows like Ghana Tantra, the scene
[Unknown]: in the unseen, the prakati podcast, Puliya Bazi and even how to look into some of the
[Unknown]: issues that really do matter. This week on Cyrus says Cyrus is joined by Tripti Khamkar.
[Unknown]: Tripti talks about how she got into acting from a young age, convincing her family, discovering
[Unknown]: her comedic talent and her very own podcast Golgappa. On Studio One, Varun Deshpande from
[Unknown]: the Good Food Institute joins us to talk about the Good Food Institute and the work that
[Unknown]: they're doing on Thalle Harate or Kannada podcast Pawan and Surya discuss the Indian
[Unknown]: judiciary and all that we need to know about its citizens. On Paisa Vaisa, Anupam hosts
[Unknown]: an hour long special with Anil Gilani, head of passive investments at DSP Mutual Fund
[Unknown]: and Mukesh Agarwal, CEO of NSE Indices, India's largest index and index service provider.
[Unknown]: This week, look out for the 50th episode of the Habit Coach podcast host Ashton Docter
[Unknown]: is joined by a special guest on this one. And with that, let's continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with the political scientist Milan
[Amit Varma]: Vaishnav on crime in politics. Why is there so much crime in Indian politics? And we take
[Amit Varma]: it so much for granted that honestly, if there wasn't so much crime in Indian politics would
[Amit Varma]: be a little surprise, right? So, you know, we've already looked at sort of the first
[Amit Varma]: question that you raised, or what are the incentives for criminals to come into politics?
[Amit Varma]: And it's because vertical integration, they want to look after the interests and all these
[Amit Varma]: rents to be made, regulatory rents, extractive rents, political rents. It's an absolute no
[Amit Varma]: brainer, you know, power brings money. If you're already a criminal, you want more of
[Amit Varma]: it and as much as you can. And why experience it second hand or third hand, just get the
[Amit Varma]: real thing. But why do parties pick criminals as a candidates?
[Guest]: So I think to understand the answer that question, you have to go back and think about how the
[Guest]: landscape has changed in recent decades. And one of the most striking changes has been
[Guest]: the growth in the cost of elections, right? And the cost of elections has grown for numerous
[Guest]: reasons. One is just population growth, right? The second is the competitiveness of elections
[Guest]: has really increased over time. If you just look at the margins of victory in state and
[Guest]: national elections, you know, they've come down quite significantly over time as the
[Guest]: political landscape has become more, more crowded. Voters also have certain expectations
[Guest]: in most places, as many of your listeners in India would certainly know on the eve of
[Guest]: elections, parties and candidates fan out across the country and provide all kinds of
[Guest]: goodies. It could be cash or liquor, the two most common as a way of trying to woo voters
[Guest]: to their side. And now we also have a multiplicity of elections, you know, when there are 3 million
[Guest]: elected panchayat officials in the country, right? So there's been an explosion in the
[Guest]: number of elections. And so all of these things are kind of interacting. Now, here's where
[Guest]: we come back to rents. You know, parties are facing this fiscal crunch of how do we meet
[Guest]: this this financial challenge, but they don't want to necessarily dedicate themselves to
[Guest]: the hard work of building party organizations, you know, recruiting members who are going
[Guest]: to fund and so on and so forth. And so they've been increasingly thrust into the embrace
[Guest]: of self financing candidates. Now, self financing candidates, as the name suggests, are people
[Guest]: who can fund their own campaigns, but they can do more than that. They would pay parties
[Guest]: for the privilege of running. They would perhaps fund or endow candidates on the same party
[Guest]: label who don't have their own resources. They might, you know, willingly engage or
[Guest]: certainly at least look the other way if there's other kind of rent seeking going on. And so
[Guest]: this is, you know, the match that's been made between political parties and wealthy candidates.
[Guest]: Now the question is where do criminals come in? Because, you know, an obvious question
[Guest]: as well. You know, there are a lot of people in India with money, right? I mean, there's
[Guest]: celebrities, there's film stars, there's cricketeers, there's whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Not podcasters.
[Guest]: Not podcasters or political scientists for that matter. And, you know, one thing that
[Guest]: criminals have is A, they have liquid resources. So both the means and the know how of how
[Guest]: to move money. The second is they have a kind of organizational platform because they tend
[Guest]: to be deeply embedded in the constituencies which they've come to represent, right? So
[Guest]: they have those networks of people and personnel and supporters already at hand. And of course
[Guest]: there's some incentive for them in terms of protection to become part of the state. Now
[Guest]: in India there is no formal immunity if you've been charged, cheated with a crime or even
[Guest]: indicted. The question of losing your seat only comes if you're convicted and even then
[Guest]: there are loopholes. But of course everyone knows that once you hold a position of political
[Guest]: power there are various formal and informal ways to derail or delay justice. So it could
[Guest]: be getting an official transferred, you know, sort of threatening punitive action if a member
[Guest]: of the state tries to come at you. So they have both parties and candidates sort of have
[Amit Varma]: incentives to make this match work.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know why my mind suddenly went to a fellow Amit. But leaving that aside, I write
[Amit Varma]: limericks for the Times of India and one that I rather like that I've written for them a
[Amit Varma]: long time back is called politics and it kind of it's illustrates what you say. A Neta who
[Amit Varma]: loves currency notes told me what his line of work denotes. It is kind of funny. We steal
[Amit Varma]: people's money and we use some of it to buy their votes. And one of the interesting questions
[Amit Varma]: I had about this, which a book points out is that everything is secret ballot. So you
[Amit Varma]: could bribe a voter. But I always used to wonder that why is it that he will then, you
[Amit Varma]: know, take a bribe from party X and not just vote for party Y. And what your book sort
[Amit Varma]: of pointed out is that look, you know, parties know this that, you know, just by paying money
[Amit Varma]: to a voter, they're not necessarily getting the vote, but it becomes a hygiene factor.
[Amit Varma]: They know for sure that if they don't give him money, they're not getting their vote.
[Amit Varma]: So they have to pay money anyway as a kind of hygiene factor. And over time, a sort of
[Amit Varma]: Lake Wobegon effect kicks in and everybody has to pay more and more and campaign finance
[Amit Varma]: just goes through the roof. And and then what do you do, you know, and these self financing
[Amit Varma]: candidates come in and just take over the whole process. This so this is fundamentally
[Guest]: the one big reason, right? Yeah, I mean, I think, look, we've done ourselves a great
[Guest]: disservice by harping on this term vote buying, because it's not an accurate description of
[Guest]: what's going on. I would prefer gift giving, because the idea that you could buy votes
[Guest]: is that there's some ironclad contract that you could sign with the voter saying, look,
[Guest]: I'm going to give you 500 bucks, and you're going to vote for me. Now, as you said, with
[Guest]: the secret ballot, if I'm a savvy voter, I'm getting 500 bucks from from you and the next
[Guest]: guy and three other people, and then I'll vote my conscience. But what politicians believe
[Guest]: is that if they don't give money, there certainly will lose. So money doesn't buy you victory,
[Guest]: it buys you a seat at the table. So the analogy that I use, it's it's sort of like playing
[Guest]: poker, right? If you're playing poker with your friends, and you want to get dealt a
[Guest]: stack of cards, you've got to Annie up, you've got to put something in the pot. Now, just
[Guest]: because you've ended up and you've given some money doesn't mean you'll win, but you have
[Guest]: no shot at winning if you don't do that, because you won't be at the table, right? And so it's
[Guest]: a it's a kind of a classic prisoner's dilemma, right? Everyone would be better off if you
[Guest]: cooperated and didn't give money. But the risks of defection are so high, that if I
[Guest]: choose not to give and Amit gives, then he's now at a competitive advantage.
[Amit Varma]: So I was actually a professional poker player for five years and a winning player. Did you
[Guest]: know this? I did not know this. Yeah. So let me so why are you doing podcasts now?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, well, long story, which I've spoken about on another podcast, you've appeared on Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: says, but just to sort of, if you'll allow me to counter what you just said, I think
[Amit Varma]: gift giving is a bit of a euphemism. I'd say it is what buying and here's why, of course,
[Amit Varma]: they won't get the vote. But let's say they don't give the voter money, the probability
[Amit Varma]: of getting a vote is zero. If they give the voter money, the probability is non zero,
[Amit Varma]: let's say maybe it's point 2.3, whatever. So they're buying point 2.3 of a vote, that's
[Amit Varma]: the expected value. So I'd still call it what buying except that it's not a full vote. It's
[Guest]: a non zero. Yeah, I think that's that's a fair way of looking at it. Right. But, you
[Guest]: know, there are some places in the world and there's a lot of research from Argentina and
[Guest]: other Latin American countries where local party machines are quite strong. So you're
[Guest]: able to monitor with some degree of measurement error what voters actually do on election
[Guest]: day. And so therefore, you know, that kind of quid pro quo might be easier to consummate.
[Amit Varma]: I just think it is lower. I think in India, it's lower. Right. Moving on from there. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, it's so far is fairly logical that okay, you know, obviously, criminals want to get
[Amit Varma]: into politics. Power is money. The Indian state has so much power and discretion that
[Amit Varma]: it's just a source of unlimited rents. And political parties, which are the intermediaries
[Amit Varma]: between in the marketplace between candidates and voters to exist, they need money to fight
[Amit Varma]: elections, they need money, self financing candidates are the best. And, you know, if
[Amit Varma]: a candidate finances himself, he is effectively subsidizing others, like you pointed out in
[Amit Varma]: your book, because the opportunity cost of the money and so on. The big question here
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, we are in a democracy, why do informed voters actually choose to
[Amit Varma]: vote for criminal politicians? In fact, one of the most surprising statistics in your
[Amit Varma]: book was that if you are a criminal, your chances of winning an election are far higher
[Amit Varma]: than that of a non criminal. It is clearly a feature, not a bug. Why do voters vote for
[Guest]: criminals? Right. So I think just to rewind for one second, if you look at this association
[Guest]: between money and criminality, what you see is that money, rich politicians do seem to
[Guest]: be disproportionately rewarded. But criminal politicians who are rich seem to have an additional
[Guest]: bump. So if money were doing all the work, then criminality shouldn't matter. So clearly
[Guest]: there's something above and beyond. There's a delta there that's benefiting criminals.
[Guest]: So what is that? And that's where I think the voters come into play. So, you know, I
[Guest]: think there's kind of two cardinal facts about how Indian politics tend to operate, right?
[Guest]: So one is that in many parts of this country, the rule of law is quite weak. And what I
[Guest]: mean by that is that the government is not seen as an impartial or credible provider
[Guest]: of kind of core state functions, right? So what public goods delivery, law and order,
[Guest]: justice and so on. So that's one. There's a vacuum there. Now, number two is that obviously
[Guest]: we know that identity politics and social divisions are a prominent feature of Indian
[Guest]: politics and that it varies from place to place. In some places, the divisions or the
[Guest]: contestation between caste groups and communities may be less or may be more. But in those places
[Guest]: where the rule of law is weak and those social divisions are highly salient, criminals are
[Guest]: able to use their criminality essentially as a sign of their credibility to get things
[Guest]: done for their constituents, right? So they're basically able to say, if you support me,
[Guest]: I'll be able to do your work by hook or crook. Now, the pitch they're making is not necessarily
[Guest]: to the constituency at large. It's primarily to their own caste or community and those
[Guest]: allied groups, right? And because we're in a first-past-the-post system, you know, you
[Guest]: can win an election with 25 or 30 percent of the vote. So you don't have to cater to
[Guest]: the median voter, right? If you could get your group and a few others on board, then
[Guest]: you could cross the finish line first. So in some ways, the electoral system also creates,
[Guest]: you know, further incentives. So this kind of reverses the usual logic of information
[Guest]: on its head, right? Which is voters actually know and candidates who are criminals have
[Guest]: an incentive to advertise that they have these characteristics because it's seen as an asset
[Guest]: and many parts are not a liability.
[Amit Varma]: Just to sort of then unpack those two points. The first point is, of course, there's no
[Amit Varma]:  the rule of law in large parts of this country is completely absent. It's an illusion.
[Amit Varma]: And government, it's said, often begins as a protection racket. And when the government
[Amit Varma]: doesn't do its job of, you know, being a credible protection racket, you have competing protection
[Amit Varma]: rackets coming in, which may or may not, you know, divide along lines of ethnicity or caste
[Amit Varma]: or identity or whatever. So the first fundamental function that a lot of these criminal groups
[Amit Varma]: do is that, listen, there is no law and order here. And I am the law and order. And this
[Amit Varma]: is something again, you point out with a bunch of concrete examples in your book, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's Mohammed Shah, Shahabuddin, or other people, where people often say about them
[Amit Varma]: that look, okay, you know, he might have all these criminal activities through his name,
[Amit Varma]: but he looks after us. You know, these are all of the things that he does for us. And
[Amit Varma]: when they list them out, you realize that, you know, this is a gap created by the absence
[Amit Varma]: of the state, the state can't provide all of this, whether it's little things like conflict
[Amit Varma]: resolution, or whether it's basic communities, these are guys coming and saying, Okay, I'll
[Amit Varma]: take care of all of you. So it's not just a gunda becoming the dada, but taking the
[Amit Varma]: place of the state in a sense, and therefore getting that respect from the community that
[Amit Varma]: this is a guy who does everything and therefore they can win the election and make the additional
[Guest]: rents that there are.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I think there's a variety of ways that they can do this. So I talked about that
[Guest]: in the book. So you know, the one thing is sort of intervening in the administration
[Guest]: and distribution of welfare benefits, right? You are denied a BPL card, the BDO, block
[Guest]: development officer in your locality is not paying attention. I contact my politician,
[Guest]: he threatens to, you know, knock a couple heads together and all of a sudden I get my
[Guest]: BPL card. So there's something around kind of welfare and administration. Law and order
[Guest]: security is another one, right? I mean, in many places, you go to a police house and
[Guest]: you are saying, Look, I've been a victim of a crime and they just you know, if you're
[Guest]: not the right profile, then you won't get an FIR filed. But again, that's worth someone
[Guest]: who can throw their weight around to make that work done, get that work done as a benefit.
[Guest]: Similar stories with justice, right? We know that the judiciary in India has so many weaknesses,
[Guest]: especially at the local level. And so therefore, if you have a neighborly dispute with someone
[Guest]: who's in your area, you could go to the courts, but you may be waiting decades for a verdict.
[Guest]: So if you go to a strongman who's able to enforce a decision, even if he rules against
[Guest]: you, at least he's decided, right? And there's sort of some finality. The fourth thing is,
[Guest]: I think, is a kind of social insurance function. You know, I mean, especially for households
[Guest]: who are hovering around the poverty line, any one shock, it could be a death in the
[Guest]: family, it could be an illness, it could be a marriage, right, where you have to come
[Guest]: up with dowry payments, you need someone that you can turn to in your kind of hour of need.
[Guest]: And that's another thing that these criminal candidates are quite good at. So one of the
[Guest]: things you often hear when you interview their voters is, you know, you paid for my daughter's
[Guest]: wedding, right? Or I had to take care of expenses after my mother died. And I didn't know who
[Guest]: to turn to because I didn't have access to formal credit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And one of the, you know, in your book, there's a stroke of this politician who claims
[Amit Varma]: he funded, you know, 10,000 marriages, I think, in a particular area himself. And there's
[Amit Varma]: an interesting defense of the same guy, if I remember by someone speaking to you and
[Amit Varma]: saying, Listen, he didn't actually murder anyone, he just ordered them.
[Guest]: Yeah. So I this was a politician by the name of Anand Singh, who was a curious figure,
[Guest]: because at the time I went and saw him, this was 2010 in Bihar. And this was when Nitish
[Guest]: Kumar had this sort of governance revolution, you know, after the what they call the 15
[Guest]: years of jungle Raj, you know, under Lallu Prasad Yadav and Rabri Devi. And here was
[Guest]: this good governance, Chief Minister, who was, you know, patronizing this gunda politician
[Guest]: Anand Singh, partially because he represented a very important sort of caste community,
[Guest]: the Bhoomi hars in central Bihar. And so I'd gone to see sort of a, you know, kind of educated
[Guest]: engineer who was a friend of a friend who lived in Anand Singh's constituency. And I
[Guest]: was pressing him on, you know, why would you vote for someone like this? And, you know,
[Guest]: I read today in the Times of India that he's wanted on sexual assault charters and murder
[Guest]: cases and you know, all these really pretty nefarious things. And, and, and then he had
[Guest]: this insight, which is, you know, you misunderstand, you know, Anand Singh isn't a murderer, he
[Guest]: merely manages murder. And that's where the protection racket really hit me, right? I
[Guest]: mean, what he was saying is, Anand Singh is the CEO of my local protection racket, and
[Guest]: I'm one of the people who's being protected. So if I want the guys over there, you know,
[Guest]: sort of figuratively pointing towards the, you know, backward caste community, the other
[Guest]: community which is gaining ground, if I want them to take over my land and my house, then
[Guest]: I can vote for a Mr. Clean politician. But as, as you know, until law and order gets
[Guest]: sorted, you know, I'm going to need my, my protection, and he's the one who's doing it.
[Guest]: So you're calling him coming from the big city and calling him a criminal, but I see
[Guest]: him as necessary.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand Rajanamurti And it's because of one protection racket
[Amit Varma]: that we should be there, the legitimate protection racket of the state is absent, which is why
[Amit Varma]: you have these sort of competing protection rackets and it's competing protection rackets,
[Amit Varma]: because you're often, mostly in India, along ethnic lines or caste lines, or basically
[Amit Varma]: along identity politics line, which with each sort of racket saying, hey, I look after my
[Amit Varma]: people and it's like you quote Lalu Prasad in your book, where at one point he says,
[Amit Varma]: vikas nahi samman chahiye, which was his, this thing, which is basically, we don't want
[Amit Varma]: development, we want respect. And again, he's speaking for a bunch of, you know, castes,
[Amit Varma]: which otherwise feel ignored. And that's what matters to them. Not so much development,
[Amit Varma]: because hey, who believes in words like that, but just patronage, give patronage to our
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I don't want to glorify these criminal politicians, because there's a central flaw in the story,
[Guest]: which is, at the end of the day, these characters, yes, they may be providing something of value.
[Guest]: And I think the fact that they're doing that, and or the perception that they're doing that
[Guest]: is what gives them voter backing. But they don't have incentive to fundamentally fix
[Guest]: what ails the state, because they are able to mobilize on the fact that the state doesn't
[Guest]: work. And so you need me to help navigate it, right? You need me to get the charges
[Guest]: filed at the police house, you need me to get the BPL card. Once you actually improve
[Guest]: the state sufficiently, that intermediary's role disappears. And so they're interested
[Guest]: typically in bandaid fixes, right? I'm not going to push for a whole scale reform of
[Guest]: the police apparatus. I don't want to necessarily fix the welfare distribution system. I want
[Guest]: to have an incentive to keep it broken, but then apply patches or band-aids where I see
[Guest]: fit. So I think that's the one central flaw, which shouldn't be overlooked. And the second,
[Guest]: again, just to reiterate, they're not necessarily interested in doing this for their constituency
[Guest]: at large, right? I mean, they are very explicit that they function sort of like Robin Hoods,
[Guest]: where you're not necessarily taking resources from the rich to pay the poor. You're taking
[Guest]: resources from one community and redistributing it to another community. So I think those
[Guest]: are there are all kinds of negative externalities from this kind of a transaction.
[Amit Varma]: Sadaq Khan Which brings us to your fourth question. Like
[Amit Varma]: we've looked at the three kinds of incentives so far incentives for the criminals to get
[Amit Varma]: into politics, for the parties to pick criminals and for the voters to vote. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: because there's no rule of law, because everyone is divided along identity lines, it makes
[Amit Varma]: sense for them to vote for the local dada who look after their needs because there's
[Amit Varma]: no other protection racket in town. How do we fix this? An even more fundamental philosophical
[Amit Varma]: question that you asked before you bear you know, when you begin your chapter, much to
[Amit Varma]: my gratification, because the question struck me as well, which is that if we are placing
[Amit Varma]: a value on a democracy where people choose their leaders, the leaders they want, why
[Amit Varma]: should we fix this?
[Guest]: Dr. Ian Lamb Yeah, I mean, that sort of, I think, builds
[Guest]: on what I just said before, which is, the election of criminals does solve a particular
[Guest]: problem in terms of it allows people to have access to something that they may not have
[Guest]: had before, right? Or, in some cases, even it's the promise of that access, they don't
[Guest]: know that they'll need something now, but they may need it in the future. And so therefore,
[Guest]: it's a kind of hedge against risk. But as I mentioned, there are these larger negative
[Guest]: externalities, because the system will never sort of improve. So what do we do to fix it?
[Guest]: You know, there, if you take the same kind of supply and demand function, or analogy
[Guest]: that I discussed, so on the supply side, this really has to do with with money, right? How
[Guest]: do you try to create a system such that money from private individuals plays less of a role?
[Guest]: And so that gets fundamentally to campaign finance reform. Then when you get to the demand
[Guest]: side, one of in the ways the most disheartening messages of the book is, I wish that this
[Guest]: was just an information story. Because if this was just an information story of voters
[Guest]: don't know how to tell a good type from a bad type, then you could invest in media,
[Guest]: you could invest in civic activism, you could invest in voter education. But if these individuals
[Guest]: are actually doing something which is both informed and rational, then you then you have
[Guest]: a problem. And the only solution there is trying to find ways of building up the state
[Guest]: capacity. And I think here, they're kind of two aspects, right? I think we often get into
[Guest]: these very simplistic debates, not just in India, the United States and the EU everywhere
[Guest]: about, you know, do we shrink the state? Do we grow the state? And you sort of have to
[Guest]: do both at the same time. So the problem in India is that you have a bureaucracy that's
[Guest]: over bureaucratized in procedural terms, right? So this is whether it's the ease of doing
[Guest]: business or the ease of, you know, getting welfare benefits, everybody who's ever tried
[Guest]: to interact with the Indian state knows that it's extremely difficult, costly, inefficient,
[Guest]: and so on. So you have to kind of cut that fat. But at the same time, the Indian state
[Guest]: has to build up its muscle. And what I mean by that is, even though it's over bureaucratized
[Guest]: procedurally, it's highly undermanned in personnel terms, right? There are large parts of the
[Guest]: bureaucratic apparatus, which simply not only don't have enough people, but they also don't
[Guest]: have the right kinds of people or the people with the right skills. And so, you know, it's
[Guest]: sort of a cute phrase. But the thing I say in the book is you kind of have to right size
[Guest]: the state, right? Now, the trouble over there is this is a generational challenge, right?
[Guest]: I mean, this is something that politicians will have to do, and then exceeds their limited
[Guest]: time horizon of say, four or five years.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanandam Bhaiyaan, Ph.D.: Yeah, and that's, in fact, an insight I first picked up from
[Amit Varma]: Fukuyama that what India needs is a strong state that does a few things well, instead
[Amit Varma]: of what we have now, which is a very large state that does everything badly. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, again, like you point out in the book, our problem is not people, we perhaps need
[Amit Varma]: more people, our problem is procedures, there are too many procedures. And both of those
[Amit Varma]: seem to strike at the heart of the incentives problem here. If you just have much less procedures,
[Amit Varma]: much less licenses to give to people, much less discretion that government servants have,
[Amit Varma]: then you immediately reduce rents available and therefore the incentives for criminals
[Amit Varma]: to come into politics because hey, how do you profit? And at the same time, if you actually
[Amit Varma]: strengthen your state where you need to, if you have a good rule of law, if you have good
[Amit Varma]: police, if you have good conflict resolution and, you know, good, you fix the justice system,
[Amit Varma]: then you don't need a protection racket apart from that because the state is doing its job
[Amit Varma]: and then you change the incentives for the voters to act. But, you know, I mean, these
[Amit Varma]: two are the obvious but very long-term fixes. And the problem with long-term fixes is that
[Amit Varma]: politicians live for the short term. So what are their incentives? I mean, can changes
[Amit Varma]: like this ever happen? They haven't for 71 years.
[Guest]: Yeah. No, it's a good question. I mean, I think there's some good news and some bad
[Guest]: news, right? So on the good news, you could say that, you know, as India is getting richer,
[Guest]: as per capita incomes are rising, politicians in many states have stopped tinkering with
[Guest]: the sort of petty corruption that most citizens have to interact with, right? So in some ways,
[Guest]: this is the story of the southern states, right? In Tamil Nadu, the day-to-day state
[Guest]: when it comes to kind of welfare and other things works pretty well, but because politicians
[Guest]: are focused on larger rents, right? Larger rents about roads and ports and highways and
[Guest]: extraction and so on. Now, one could say cynically, that's a sign of progress, right? You've kind
[Guest]: of shifted from a blue collar corruption equilibrium to a white collar.
[Guest]: At least the common man doesn't face a burden.
[Guest]: At least the common man doesn't face a burden and, you know, just look at Andhra and Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu in particular. I mean, it's virtually impossible to make it in politics if you aren't
[Guest]: some kind of person involved in infrastructure or real estate, right? I mean, that's where
[Guest]: the  it's most noticeable. So the flippant sort of thing I talk about, I guess it's
[Guest]: not in the book, but what I was thinking about, which is a kind of film analogy is, you know,
[Guest]: sort of like the transition from Godfather I to Godfather III, right? I mean, how do
[Guest]: you essentially legitimize yourself that you move away from kind of ordinary corruption
[Guest]: to try to actually, you know, make money in a maybe perhaps less corrupt or less distortionary
[Guest]: way for kind of the average person? And I think that's the sort of trajectory that
[Guest]: maybe India is on. So that's one.
[Guest]: The second is, you know, the middle class is very absent. And I think one of the big
[Guest]: stories about post-independence India is how the middle class has really exited from mainstream
[Guest]: politics. You know, I think many people who were in the middle class were disappointed
[Guest]: with what the state could do and then realized that they had private alternatives, whether
[Guest]: it's schools, water, education, healthcare, security. And so how do we re-engage that
[Guest]: part of the citizenry to say, look, this matters for you? Because at some point, you have to
[Guest]: step outside of your bubble and deal with, you know, the central problem of the state.
[Guest]: And that's, you know, historically, I think, in many societies, what has helped to kind
[Guest]: of push reform. And then crisis, right? I mean, when you see or have either economic
[Guest]: crises or corruption scandals, right, they tend to introduce some kind of turn in the
[Guest]: system. Now, unfortunately, you don't want to wait for a crisis to happen to have to
[Guest]: do reform. But I think empirically, that's often what we see.
[Amit Varma]: Some would argue we are in the middle of an ongoing crisis. It's like a frog in boiling
[Amit Varma]: water. You don't notice the temperature getting higher. Of course, that's an apocryphal story.
[Amit Varma]: The frog will actually jump out if the water reaches a certain temperature. And the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing about the second point you made is that India's middle class has actually grown massively
[Amit Varma]: since liberalization. So you'd expect that, you know, earlier, one reason for the apathy
[Amit Varma]: could have been that, you know, what difference does it make if I go and vote? It makes absolutely
[Amit Varma]: no difference. But now that's changed. But then, you know, people respond to crisis in
[Amit Varma]: different ways. And it's not necessary that everyone will want these long term kind of
[Amit Varma]: solutions. What you also say in your book is that a lot of the short term solutions
[Amit Varma]: which people come up with just don't work and might even be dangerous. Tell me a little
[Guest]: bit about that.
[Guest]: Well, you know, I think if you take the justice system, for example, everybody's favorite
[Guest]: remedy for what ails the justice system is fast track courts, right? And so we saw this
[Guest]: after the horrific gang rape in Delhi in 2012. We this even got gets talked about in the
[Guest]: context of criminal politicians that can't you just set up fast track courts and I talk
[Guest]: about that in the book as well. But what you see from studies of these courts is that eventually
[Guest]: they just succumb to the larger pathologies of the justice system. That's one problem.
[Guest]: The second problem is by giving fast justice to someone, you're necessarily giving slow
[Guest]: justice to someone else. You know, I think this is a really hard nut to crack because
[Guest]: politicians are able to occupy this gray space where they're able to say, look, I've been
[Guest]: charged with a crime, but I haven't been convicted of one yet. And in this country, we have the
[Guest]: rule of law which says, look, there's a presumption of innocence until being proven guilty. And
[Guest]: they're right. Now, on the other hand, given the infirmities of the justice system, they
[Guest]: also know that they can wait this out. So, you know, if we go back to the case of Anand
[Guest]: Singh, who was the CEO of the protection racket, the the management of murder, not the murder,
[Guest]: you know, he had dozens of cases that went back literally decades, and none of them had
[Guest]: ever come to any kind of conclusion because, you know, judges passed on, prosecutors were
[Guest]: transferred evidence, you know, literally went up missing, witnesses got got cold feet.
[Guest]: And so the solution to the problem is kind of inherent in the nature of the problem itself.
[Amit Varma]: Right. Your fifth question, finally, which is what is the impact of this on democracy?
[Guest]: So you know, here, I think there's a couple of ways of looking at it. I mean, I think
[Guest]: one is that, in some ways, you know, criminality is a byproduct of how democracy has been functioning
[Guest]: in a weakly institutionalized setting. You know, I think there's some people who would
[Guest]: prefer to consider this phenomenon, as you know, these are a bunch of sub national, authoritarian
[Guest]: figures who are going around coercing voters and manipulating results. And that's how they're
[Guest]: able to win. I don't find that framing to be very helpful, because, you know, in many
[Guest]: cases, these are people who are will winning some of the most competitive elections anywhere
[Guest]: in the world. And they're doing that. Because voters vote for them, and again, believe that
[Guest]: they're making a rational calculation, it may not be the first best solution, right?
[Guest]: I mean, voters are not stupid, they Yeah, it'd be great to have a clean politician.
[Guest]: But given what's around us, I don't think that that's necessarily going to pay off for
[Guest]: the here and the now. So I think the larger potential fallout from this is, does it start
[Guest]: to erode people's perceptions of democracy and the rule of law? Do they start to say,
[Guest]: well, this particular politician is able to get away literally with murder? And so therefore,
[Guest]: you know, why should a different set of rules, you know, apply to me? And, you know, I think
[Guest]: here to, you know, this is where money comes in, right? If people literally think that,
[Guest]: you know, look, I mean, you could buy or sell elections, then forget about it, I'm just
[Guest]: going to retreat, and you end up with voter apathy, or you just get up with this very
[Guest]: cynical kind of notion of special interest politics. So, so again, it's a good news,
[Guest]: bad news story, which in some sense, these people are products of democracy, but they're
[Guest]: creating a kind of partial accountability that has lots of other, you know, negative
[Guest]: consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Sadaq Khan So I'm going to kind of end with a standard
[Amit Varma]: question, which I ask all of my guests on the subject of the choice, which is not about
[Amit Varma]: crime in politics, but about democracy in general, Indian democracy in general, what
[Amit Varma]: makes you hopeful? And what makes you despair about the future of Indian democracy, let's
[Amit Varma]: say within a 10 year timeframe from now?
[Guest]: Dr. Ian Lamb So I think what makes me hopeful is that,
[Guest]: you know, is sort of the legacy of the past in some sense, and that, you know, every 10
[Guest]: years or so, someone writes a big book, which pronounces, you know, that Indian democracy
[Guest]: is going to implode. And every 10 years, those people have been proven wrong. I mean, it
[Guest]: goes back to, you know, Selig Harrison, and the most dangerous decades, which, you know,
[Guest]: was written, I believe, in the 1950s, or 1960s, saying, you know, this place isn't going to
[Guest]: last very long. So, you know, Sunil Killnani has this very nice insight in the idea of
[Guest]: India where he says, it wasn't that there was some grand normative consensus around
[Guest]: liberal democracy in India, it was basically the only system that could potentially handle
[Guest]: this constant collision of different interests, and ideas and customs, right, that they were
[Guest]: constantly clashing, and this was a way to sort of accommodate them. So I think on that
[Guest]: overall story, I think, sort of still holds, I think one of the emerging issues that we're
[Guest]: not paying attention to is what is happening in our states across our states, right? There
[Guest]: is an increasingly entrenched interstate inequality. And it's not just North and South. Well, that's
[Guest]: one dimension, but it's also kind of an East West story. You've seen the recent stir over
[Guest]: the Finance Commission and whether or not central transfer should be allocated on the
[Guest]: basis of population or something else. Obviously, if it was population, you know, the South
[Guest]: would lose because fertility rates have dropped. There's a question over how you share tax
[Guest]: revenue, you know, there's a study which shows that on income, you know, the three richest
[Guest]: states are three times richer than the three poorest states, then there's something that
[Guest]: I wrote about recently, which is political representation, you know, India's legislatures
[Guest]: are highly malapportioned, right? We have not updated the statewise breakdown of parliamentary
[Guest]: seats since 1971. And if you were to do that today, you know, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar would
[Guest]: get 16 seats and, you know, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu would lose about, you know, 15
[Guest]: seats. That's a huge shift in political power. And it's only going to get worse. The Constitution
[Guest]: says you can't change this until 2031 when we do that census, at which time those differences
[Guest]: are only going to become more pronounced. So I think we're at a stage where we need
[Guest]: to think of a grand bargain, because Indian federalism was the glue that's kept this project
[Guest]: together. But I think it's now showing showing its age. So you know, in the 50s, we had the
[Guest]: state's reorganization commission, right? That was this moment at which we figured out
[Guest]: how do we create this kind of federal compact. And I think we're in the need for that moment.
[Guest]: We can't look at each of these issues in isolation. But I fear that's where we're headed.
[Amit Varma]: Mahesh Thakur Thanks. What your answer has done is, is
[Amit Varma]: filled me with despair about the state of our nation. But I am hopeful that it'll be
[Amit Varma]: a hell of a spectacle going down. Thank you for coming on the scene in the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Amit Bhandari Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to your nearest bookstore
[Amit Varma]: online or offline and pick up a copy of When Crime Pays by Milan Vaishnav. Also do check
[Amit Varma]: out Milan's elections podcast, the grand tamasha linked on this episode page. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: Milan on Twitter at Milan V Milan V one word you can follow me at Amit Verma, A M I T V
[Amit Varma]: A R M A. The scene in the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent
[Amit Varma]: center for research and education in public policy. You can browse all our past episodes
[Amit Varma]: at seen unseen.in and think Pragati.com Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hi, my name is Anupam Gupta. I'm B 50 on Twitter. I am the host of Pesa Pesa, the show that
[Unknown]: talks money on my show I speak to experts from every field of money and finance, from
[Unknown]: stock markets, equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance, every possible area
[Unknown]: of money and finance that you can think of. We even did an episode on cryptocurrency.
[Unknown]: I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance experts everywhere. Robo
[Unknown]: advisory startup, just name it, we've got it at Pesa Pesa. We help you make smart decisions
[Unknown]: about money. You work hard for money. Now make your money work hard for you. New episodes
[Unknown]: out every Monday and you can listen to my show on the IBM podcast app or any other podcasting
[Unknown]: app that you have. Pesa Pesa is brought to you by Paytm Money.
[Unknown]: Hey Meghnad, do you know how to citizen? Hey Shreyas, do you know how to citizen? Hey Meghnad,
[Unknown]: do you know how to citizen? Hey Shreyas, let's just do a podcast about it. Let's do a podcast
[Unknown]: about it. A podcast is called How to Citizen. In every episode, we get a new guest and discuss
[Unknown]: one chapter from the eighth grade civics textbook. Think about it as three friends revising before
[Unknown]: a test and we go back to school. There's nostalgia, there's trauma, there are lunch breaks, there
[Unknown]: are favorite teachers, there are horrible teachers, there's everything. So every Tuesday, we bring
[Unknown]: in a guest on the podcast and we ask them a very simple question. Do you know how to
[Unknown]: citizen? Meghnad, I think the question is do you know how to citizen? But Shreyas, I'm
[Unknown]: asking you this question. Do you know how to citizen?